blockchain module: p2p lecture refactoring (#1023)
Polkadot-Blockchain-Academy/pba-content: syllabus/3-Blockchain/2-P2P_Networks_State_Machines-slides.md

---

## From Circuit Switching to **Packet Switching**

- Mode of data transmission in which a message is broken into a number of parts (packets) that are sent independently <!-- .element: class="fragment" data-fragment-index="2" -->
- Packets are sent over whatever route is optimal <!-- .element: class="fragment" data-fragment-index="3" -->
- Packets are reassembled at the destination <!-- .element: class="fragment" data-fragment-index="4" -->

Notes:

Standard telephone networks used circuit switching, where a physical wire connected two communicating ends.

Packet-switching, on the other hand, is a more decentralized approach that can divide data, send it across the network, and reconstruct it.

The network is now able to survive partial destruction because there is no longer a single physical circuit between machines.

It was the first step toward a distributed and resilient network

---v

## Packets

<img style="width: 600px" src="./img/message_packet.svg" />

Notes:

Mention that headers contain addressing, destination information, and ordering, typically depending on the context

---v

## Routing

<img style="width: 600px" src="./img/packet_switching_1.svg"  />

Notes:

> we have a message that needs to be sent between two nodes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have a message that needs to be sent between two nodes.
```

---v

## Routing

<img  style="width: 600px" src="./img/packet_switching_2.svg" />

Notes:

A Route is composed of all the nodes that will be traversed before reaching the ends.

Not all packets need to traverse the same route

---v

## What if a node goes down?

<img style="width: 600px" src="./img/packet_switching_3.svg" />

---v

> ## Another Route is used

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Another Route is Used
```

As said before, not all packets need to be routed in the same way

---v

## ARPANET

- First operational packet-switching network <!-- .element: class="fragment" data-fragment-index="2" -->
- Developed in the late 1960s by DARPA(The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency) <!-- .element: class="fragment" data-fragment-index="3" -->
- Laid the foundation for the modern internet <!-- .element: class="fragment" data-fragment-index="4" -->

Notes:

Arpanet followed a more Client-Server structure, where people were asking for papers, documents, and other information

---

## Peer-to-Peer (P2P) Networks

- Unlike client-server model, all nodes (peers) are equal participants <!-- .element: class="fragment" data-fragment-index="2" -->
- P2P is a decentralized form of network structure <!-- .element: class="fragment" data-fragment-index="3" -->
- Data is shared directly between systems without a central server <!-- .element: class="fragment" data-fragment-index="4" -->
- Peers contribute resources, including bandwidth, storage space, and processing power <!-- .element: class="fragment" data-fragment-index="5" -->

Notes:

> In oppose to client-server structures, p2p structures are a different type of network in which all nodes are at the same level

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As opposed to client-server structures, p2p structures are a different type of network in which all nodes are at the same level
```

Napster had to comply by banning hundreds of thousands of users from their platform who were sharing Metallica's music.
This was a turning point in digital copyright law and played a significant role in Napster's eventual shutdown in 2001.

---v

## Napster Setup

<img style="width: 600px" src="./img/napster_1.svg" />

---v

## Napster Setup

<img style="width: 600px" src="./img/napster_2.svg" />

---v

## Napster Setup

<img style="width: 600px" src="./img/napster_3.svg" />

---v

## Napster Setup

<img style="width: 600px" src="./img/napster_4.svg" />

---

## Limewire

Free Software p2p file sharing **client**

<!-- .element: class="fragment" data-fragment-index="2" -->

In its history, it has mainly used two protocols

<!-- .element: class="fragment" data-fragment-index="3" -->

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Notes:

First Gnutella, and then later BitTorrent. Let's look at each of them.
```

I think it is wise to mention the two protocols immediately, before you cover them individually. Otherwise, by the time you finish Gnutella and get on to BitTorrent, people might not even remember that they are in the middle of a list of two protocols used by lime wire.

---v

## Gnutella

- Each node serves as both a client and a server <!-- .element: class="fragment" data-fragment-index="2" -->
- Query recursively all connected nodes for files <!-- .element: class="fragment" data-fragment-index="3" -->
- It does not just flood the network, it does it intelligently using concepts such as:
  <!-- .element: class="fragment" data-fragment-index="4" -->
  - Infection Factor
  <!-- .element: class="fragment" data-fragment-index="5" -->
  - TTL (Time To Live)
  <!-- .element: class="fragment" data-fragment-index="5" -->

<img style="width: 400px" src="./img/gnutella.gif" />
<!-- .element: class="fragment" data-fragment-index="5" -->

Notes:

- Check local filestore for file and if it is not available, forward the request to all connected peers.

- Gnutella generates a significant amount of network traffic

> source: https://nakamoto.com/gnutella/

Reviewer: Yeah, make sure they know this is a good link worth looking at. It is a source for that direct claim about flooding, but it also has a lot more to offer.

---v

## BitTorrent

First launched using Trackers: <!-- .element: class="fragment" data-fragment-index="2" -->

- Files are split into multiple pieces <!-- .element: class="fragment" data-fragment-index="3" -->
- .torrent files contain the hash of the pieces <!-- .element: class="fragment" data-fragment-index="4" -->
- Trackers saves which peers in the network have which file
<!-- .element: class="fragment" data-fragment-index="5" -->

```rust
HashMap<FileId, Vec<Peer>>
```

<!-- .element: class="fragment" data-fragment-index="5" -->

- You can download different pieces by different peers in parallel <!-- .element: class="fragment" data-fragment-index="6" -->

Notes:

More efficient peer-to-peer (p2p) file sharing networks than Gnutella (but more centralized).

Each data was split into multiple packets.

You could request from each peer in the swarm a piece of the file you wanted to download to really take advantage of the increased bandwidth offered by the p2p network

---v

<img style="width: 600px" src="./img/bittorrent.svg" />

---v

## BitTorrent

Later introduced, **Trackerless** mode:

<!-- .element: class="fragment" data-fragment-index="7" -->

> - do not require Trackers node

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Does not require Tracker nodes
```

            <tr class="fragment">
                <td>Security</td>
                <td>Centralized security measures, single point of failure</td>
                <td>Potential attack vector to the network from the outside, but also sensible to malicious actors
            </tr>
        </tbody>
    </table>
</section>

---

### Single Point of failure - Centralized Networks

<img style="width: 600px" src="./img/client_server_1.svg" />

---v

### Single Point of failure - Centralized Networks

<img style="width: 600px" src="./img/client_server_2.svg" />

---v

### Single Point of failure - Decentralized Networks

<img style="width: 600px" src="./img/p2p_topology_1.svg" />

Notes:

1. No single node or nodes (CDN) have access to all of the content or files or is critical for operating the network. Each node has a copy of the data.
2. No central node carrying all of the load of traffic.

---v

### Single Point of failure - Decentralized Networks

<img style="width: 600px" src="./img/p2p_topology_2.svg" />

Notes:

> 4. Difficult to overload the network or DOS (Not a single node is privileged).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Difficult to overload the network or DOS (No single node is privileged).
```

---

## Gossip Protocol

<img style="width: 500px" src="./img/3.7-p2p-gossip-1.svg" />

Notes:

Given structured or unstructured networks, messages still have to be transmitted to other nodes

In blockchain, nodes could gossip blocks that have been produced or received by someone else. Now it's time for that node to decide how it should be gossiped

---v

## Gossip Protocol

<img style="width: 85s0px" src="./img/3.7-p2p-gossip-2.svg" />

Notes:

Bitcoin floods the network with requests, gossiping the block to all the known nodes, because the want share the last produced block as fast as possible.

Less consuming strategies could be applied, as Gnutella did, or even using advertising. Asking for more context before sending the data.

> There are multiple ways to gossip information/blocks, and it depends on why you're sharing that information

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are multiple ways to gossip information/blocks, and it depends on why you're sharing that information.
```
